Add documentation for Kafka CDC producer (#274)
stargate/stargate: producer-kafka/README.adoc

> = Using the Kafka CDC Producer

Reviewer: I think we should continue using markdown for documentation, we shouldn't have multiple formats in the same project.

Author: I don't see a guideline on using MD vs adoc. I picked the adoc because it is more flexible and has a lot more benefits. For all new products in drivers we were using adoc, we were even planning to migrate java driver documentation to adoc. The doc team also prefers this format.

This extension provides support for sending Change Data Capture(CDC) events to an Apache Kafka®.

> It is designed to work with the DataStax Stargate.

Reviewer 2: "_DataStax_ Stargate"? I though we wanted to avoid explicit referenced to DataStax in Stargate

Reviewer 3: Yes, remove that

== Kafka CDC - Stargate integration

> This extension is designed to integrate with Stargate. It uses an link:https://www.osgi.org/[OSGi] framework for registering the extension within Stargate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This extension is designed to integrate with Stargate. It uses a link:https://www.osgi.org/[OSGi] framework for registering the extension within Stargate.
```

Reviewer 3: > an OSGI framework 

English grammar is annoying

https://www.merriam-webster.com/words-at-play/is-it-a-or-an

> This extension is designed to integrate with Stargate. It uses a link:https://www.osgi.org/[OSGi] framework for registering the extension within the Stargate.

Reviewer 2: _the_ OSGi framework?

> This extension is designed to integrate with Stargate. It uses a link:https://www.osgi.org/[OSGi] framework for registering the extension within the Stargate.

Reviewer 3: Also, if you want to be specific you could link to Apache Felix which is the OSGI lib we use.
```suggestion
This extension is designed to integrate with Stargate. It uses an link:https://www.osgi.org/[OSGi] framework for registering the extension within Stargate.
```

Author: re: adding felix, I am not sure if we want to be such specific.

> The `KafkaProducerActivator` class handles the registration process. When you put the `producer-kafka-{version}.jar` in the

Reviewer: We need to introduce a way to allow registration based on config, otherwise we can't have it in tree.

Author: Yes, I agree. The dynamic registration will be also important when setting configuration from UI and allowing clients to restart only given extension. But I don't see how it relates to this documentation. 
Do you want me to remove the paragraph about putting a jar in `stargate-lib`? It seems that this statement is true for the current point in time.

Reviewer 3: I'd say we're good as is but make sure it's there before we merge into master

Author: Ok, I've created a JIRA task for it

> The `KafkaProducerActivator` class handles the registration process. When you will put the `producer-kafka-{version}.jar` in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `KafkaProducerActivator` class handles the registration process. When you put the `producer-kafka-{version}.jar` in the
```

`/stargate-lib` directory it will be automatically picked, and the activator logic is invoked.

This extension has one service required: `Metrics` - this is provided by the `CoreActivator` in the link:../core[core] module.

== Architecture

The main entry point for this CDC connector is a link:../producer-kafka/src/main/java/io/stargate/producer/kafka/KafkaCDCProducer.java[KafkaCDCProducer].

> It implements the SchemaAwareCDCProducer interface that serves as an integration layer between Stargate's persistence and CDC extension.

Reviewer: Extends `SchemaAwareCDCProducer`  class.

> 1. `init()` - takes the map of configuration settings that are passed from Stargate to the CDC connector. The configuration settings are described in <<Configuration>>

Reviewer: I think that from the user pov, a high level overview is more beneficial than a method by method rundown (maybe this kind of doc belongs in code).

Author: For the CDC-extension, user pov is a stargate. The stargate is the main user of this extension. It cannot be used outside of the stargate. So this method rundown shows the contract between this producer and stargate. If we have an external contributor to this particular Kafka-CDC-extension, it will be beneficial to contributors to have that information.

> 1. `init()` - takes the map of configuration settings that are passed from the Stargate to CDC connector. The configuration settings are described in <<Configuration>>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. `init()` - takes the map of configuration settings that are passed from Stargate to the CDC connector. The configuration settings are described in <<Configuration>>
```

> 2. `createTableSchemaAsync()` - MUST be invoked on every Stargate node before any call to `send` is made (including restarts).

Reviewer: > MUST be invoked

I think it sounds like the end user needs to do something here. We could state that it _will_ be invoked.

Author: This is documentation from the perspective of the CDC particular producer. So the extension does not influence that it _will_ be invoked. I try to signal that it MUST be invoked, and this extension's logic relies on that fact.

> 2. `createTableSchemaAsync()` - MUST be invoked on every Stargate node before any call to the `send` is made (including restarts).
> This method is responsible for constructing the Avro schema based on the `TableMetadata` and registering the schema in link:https://docs.confluent.io/current/schema-registry/index.html[schema registry].
> It is also invoked if any schema change on the CDC-enabled table is made. The detailed process of schema creation is described in <<Schema Creation>>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. `createTableSchemaAsync()` - MUST be invoked on every Stargate node before any call to `send` is made (including restarts).
This method is responsible for constructing the Avro schema based on the `TableMetadata` and registering the schema in link:https://docs.confluent.io/current/schema-registry/index.html[schema registry].
It is also invoked if any schema change on a CDC-enabled table is made. The detailed process of schema creation is described in <<Schema Creation>>
```

3. `send()` - it is responsible for creating a link:https://avro.apache.org/docs/1.10.0/api/java/org/apache/avro/generic/GenericRecord.html[GenericRecord] based on the Avro schema created in the previous step.
Once the record is created, it is sent to the Apache Kafka topic.

4. `close()` - it flushes all pending records from the underlying Kafka producer and closes it.

image::documentation/Kafka_CDC_architecture.png[Kafka CDC architecture]

Let's recap the basics of architecture. The CDC connector is working within a Stargate node. The stargate node sends the TableMetadata when the schema is changed, OR the Stargate node is restarted.

> It constructs the schema and registers it in the schema registry. When the new CDC event occurs, the Stargate is propagating
> this change to the CDC extension via the send() method. The send() retrieves the schema form schema registry (or a local cache), constructs the Avro record, and sends it to Kafka.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It constructs the schema and registers it in the schema registry. When the new CDC event occurs, Stargate propagates
this change to the CDC extension via the send() method. The send() method retrieves the schema from the schema registry (or a local cache), constructs the Avro record, and then sends it to Kafka.
```

== Configuration

> The `init()` method takes the `Map<String, Object>` as an argument. This map must contain the required settings for running the Kafka CDC connector.

Reviewer 3: How are these being provided to stargate? As system args? From a table?

Author: Using a new config store mechanism that does not exist yet. I plan to work on it next

Reviewer 3: Got it 👍

There are multiple required settings:

=== Prefix Name

`cdc.topic.prefix-name` - it should contain a `String` value. It is used to construct the topic name to which the CDC modification for a given TableMetadata is sent.
Value from this setting is used as a prefix. For example, if the prefix is 'p', keyspace 'ks' and table 't', the final topic name will be: 'p.ks.t'

> The send() will publish a CDC event to a Kafka topic constructed  using this strategy

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The send() will publish a CDC event to a Kafka topic constructed using this strategy
```

=== Kafka Producer Settings
All Kafka Producer settings must be prefixed with `cdc.kafka.producer`.
The Kafka producer has an extensive list of producer settings. For a full list, please visit the link:https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#producerconfigs[Kafka producer configs].
All settings with the `cdc.kafka.producer` passed to this extension will be passed to the Kafka producer.
So for example, the `cdc.kafka.producer.max.block.ms` will be trimmed to `max.block.ms` and passed to the producer.
There are two required settings that you need to pass to the CDC connector.

- `cdc.kafka.producer.bootstrap.servers` - please note that you need to prefix it with CDC setting prefix. It contains a list of Kafka servers.

> - `cdc.kafka.producer.schema.registry.url` - it contains one URL or multiple urls to a schema registry that will be used to schema management.

Reviewer 3: If it's multiple URLs are they comma delimited?
```suggestion
- `cdc.kafka.producer.schema.registry.url` - contains one URL or multiple urls for a schema registry that will be used to schema management.
```

The `schema-registry` should work in the `full_transitive` compatibility mode to allow the backward and forward compatible evolution of schema.
To see how to achieve it, please visit the link:https://docs.confluent.io/current/schema-registry/avro.html#compatibility-types[Schema Registry Guide].

> - Two Kafka producer settings cannot be set by the user: `key.serializer` and `value.serializer` - must be set to `KafkaAvroSerializer.class`
> because the CDC producer uses Avro format for publishing events to a Kafka. If the user passes those settings, they will be ignored.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- There are two Kafka producer settings which cannot be set by the user: `key.serializer` and `value.serializer` - both must be set to `KafkaAvroSerializer.class`
because the CDC producer uses Avro format for publishing events to Kafka. Any value provided for these two settings will be ignored.
```

=== Metrics Settings
The metrics framework has three settings that allow you to control it:

- `cdc.kafka.metrics.enabled` - whether the CDC extension should register all Kafka producer metrics in the `MetricRegistry`. This setting is required. It should contain a boolean value.
- `cdc.kafka.metrics.include-tags` - whether the registered metric name should include tags(if exists). This setting is optional. If not specified, it will be set to `true`. It should contain a boolean value.

> - `cdc.kafka.metrics.name` - this is the prefix used to expose metrics on the `MetricRegistry`. This setting is optional. If not specified, it will be set to `producer`.

Reviewer 3: Are we also adding our own prefix in there somewhere to ensure uniqueness across modules?

Author: yes, we are: `KAFKA_CDC_METRICS_PREFIX = "cdc.kafka";`. I will mention that

== Schema Creation
When the `createTableSchemaAsync()` is invoked on the CDC producer, it constructs the Avro `Schema` for key and value.
Let's take a look at the process of constructing a Avro schema.

=== Key Schema
The key schema contains all partition keys from the TableMetadata passed to the `createTableSchemaAsync`.
For example, if the table metadata contains one primary key with a field name: `pk_1` of a string type, the constructed schema will be:
[source,json]
----
{
   "type":"record",
   "name":"Key",
   "namespace":"topicPrefix.keyspaceName.tableName",
   "fields":[
      {
         "name":"pk_1",
         "type":"string"
      }
   ]
}
----
Please note that this schema's name will be `Key`, but this schema is created in the context of a specific namespace.
The namespace equals a topic name constructed based on the `cdc.topic.prefix-name` and `TableMetadata` keyspace and table.

> Once the schema for a specific key was created, you cannot remove or rename any existing field. Such a change will not be backward compatible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once the schema for a specific key is created, you cannot remove or rename any existing field. Such a change will not be backward compatible.
```

By doing so, you will break the consumers of the Kafka topic. You are allowed to add a new Primary Key because adding a new field to an Avro schema is backward compatible.

=== Value Schema
The value schema is more complicated because it must allow three states for any non-Primary Key field.
The first state is an actual value denoting that this value changed. The second state is the absence of a value, meaning no change for a given field.

> The third state that it should allow it null value for a given field. It denotes that clearing of the specific value (it can be deleted or just setting it to null explicitly).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The third state that it should allow is null value for a given field. This denotes clearing of the specific value (due to either being deleted or set to null explicitly).
```

> The third state that it should allow is null value for a given field. This denotes clearing of the specific value (due to either being deleted or set to null explicitly).

Reviewer: I think these paragraphs can be confusing...

We can express it as what happens and how is that represented in the Kafka schema, for example:

> During a database mutation, a given column of a row can be given a new value, it can be cleared (set to `null`) or left unchanged. In the same way, for a given field the `Value` schema can contain the new value, the `null` value or the absence of the value.

                           }
                        ]
                     }
                  ],
                  "default":null
               },
               {
                  "name":"col_1",
                  "type":[
                     "null",
                     {
                        "type":"record",
                        "name":"col_1",
                        "namespace":"",
                        "fields":[
                           {
                              "name":"value",
                              "type":[
                                 "null",
                                 "string"
                              ],
                              "default":null
                           }
                        ]
                     }
                  ],
                  "default":null
               }
            ]
         }
      }
   ]
}
----
The name of this schema is `Value` and it is created in the same namespace as `key` schema.
There are two required fields. The first one is `op` denoting the type of operation. It can be updated, meaning that some value in the CDC enabled table changed.

> For the update, the `op` will have a value equal to `u`. The second possible state is deleted. It means that there was a delete of the field in the database.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the update, the `op` will have a value equal to `u`. The second possible state is deleted which means that there was a delete on the field in the database.
```

The deleted value is `d`. The `ts_ms` contains the timestamp of a change.

> Every field (Primary Key, Clustering Key, and normal cell) has a union schema. It means that the whole field can be absent.
> The field's actual value is also a union of the type of a field and a `null`. When the value is `null`, it means that there field was cleared.
> So, to sum up, such a structure allow the CDC connector to model 3 states:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Every field (Primary Key, Clustering Key, and normal cell) has a union schema, meaning the whole field can be absent.
The field's actual value is also a union of the type of a field and `null`. When the value is `null`, it means that the field was cleared.
So, to sum up, such a structure allow the CDC connector to model 3 states:
```

==== Absence of the Value
The absence of change is presented as a null union value. For example, if `col_1` was not modified then the Avro record will look like this:

[source,json]
----
{

>    "op":"d",

Reviewer 2: `op` `d` or `u`?... This looks like an update event to me :thinking:

Author: right, changed

Finally, the most obvious state is denoting that there was a change to the particular field.
The resulting CDC event will contain the value with a change:
[source,json]
----
{
   "op":"d",
   "ts_ms":0,
   "data":{
      "pk_1":{
         "value":"pk_value"
      },
      "ck_1":{
         "value":1
      },
      "col_1":{
         "value": "new_value"
      }
   }
}
----
The `new_value` means a change of the `col_1` cell in the underlying database.

The value schema is more flexible regarding keeping the compatibility.
This flexibility is achieved by using a union type that allows the evolution of schema in a backward-compatible way.
It will enable renaming, adding, and removing of Clustering Key and Cells.
To make it work, you need to assure that the consumer will read the Avro record using proper schema id.

=== Schema Supported Types
The resulting schema supports a variety of types that can be used for any cell value.

==== Supported Native Types.
Let's take a look at a list of supported native types:

- `Native.ASCII` is serialized as avro `Type.STRING`.
- `Native.BIGINT` is serialized as avro `Type.LONG`.
- `Native.BLOB` is serialized as avro `Type.BYTES`.

> - `Native.BLOB` is serialized as avro `Type.BYTES`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Duplicate

- `Native.DECIMAL` is serialized as avro logical `decimal` type with underlying `Type.BYTES` representation. It uses `10` as a default decimal precision.
- `Native.DOUBLE` is serialized as avro `Type.DOUBLE`.
- `Native.DURATION` is serialized as a raw `Type.BYTES`
- `Native.FLOAT` is serialized as avro `Type.FLOAT`.
- `Native.INET` is serialized as a raw `Type.BYTES`
- `Native.INT` is serialized as avro `Type.INT`.
- `Native.SMALLINT` is serialized as avro logical `short` type with underlying `Type.INT` representation.
- `Native.TEXT` is serialized as avro `Type.STRING`.
- `Native.TIME` is serialized as avro logical `timeMicros` type with underlying `Type.LONG` representation.
- `Native.TIMESTAMP` is serialized as avro logical `timestampMillis` type with underlying `Type.LONG` representation.
- `Native.TIMEUUID` is serialized as avro logical `uuid` type with underlying `Type.STRING` representation.
- `Native.TINYINT` is serialized as avro logical `byte` type with underlying `Type.INT` representation.
- `Native.UUID` is serialized as avro logical `uuid` type with underlying `Type.STRING` representation.
- `Native.VARCHAR` is serialized as avro `Type.STRING`.

> - `Native.TIMESTAMP` is serialized as avro logical `bigInteger` type with underlying `Type.BYTES` representation.

Reviewer 3: Is this a typo? There's this one up above

```
- `Native.TIMESTAMP` is serialized as avro logical `timestampMillis` type with underlying `Type.LONG` representation.
```

Author: this was a typo, fixed now

"fields":[
   {
      "name":"udtcol_1",
      "type":"int"
   },
   {
      "name":"udtcol_2",
      "type":"string"
   }
 ]
}
----

The generated schema also supports nested UserDefined types.

==== Tuple Type

The Tuple is a Record type in Avro. For example, such a Tuple type:

[source,java]
----
new Tuple(Native.INT, new Collection(Kind.LIST, Native.TEXT));
----

will have the following schema:

[source,json]
----
{
"type":"record",
"name":"tuple_int_list_text__",
"fields":[
   {
      "name":"t_0",
      "type":"int"
   },
   {
      "name":"t_1",
      "type":{
         "type":"array",
         "items":"string"
      }
   }
 ]
}
----

Please note that the name of the record is transformed according to `CqlToAvroTypeConverter#tupleToRecordName(Tuple)` method.
Every element in the tuple has a name according to `CqlToAvroTypeConverter#toTupleFieldName(int)`.
The generated schema also supports nested Tuple types.

==== Custom Type
The custom type is saved as bytes without an attempt to deserialize it. It's the client
responsibility to deserialize it correctly.
Currently, the class name form `Custom#getClassName()` is not propagated in the avro message.

== New Topic Creation

> When the mutation event for a topic that does not exists in Kafka arrives, the producer will create the topic automatically if

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a mutation event for a topic that does not exist in Kafka arrives, the producer will create the topic automatically if
```

link:https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#allow.auto.create.topics[allow.auto.create.topics] on the Kafka broker is enabled.

> It is enabled on default. It would be best if you were careful because Kafka will automatically create the topic with the default replication factor and number of partitions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is enabled by default. **NOTE**: you should be careful with this setting since Kafka will automatically create the topic with the default replication factor and number of partitions.
```

> You need to assure that the link:https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#num.partitions[default number of partitions]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You should check if the link:https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#num.partitions[default number of partitions]
```

and link:https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#default.replication.factor[replicas] settings are optimal for your cluster.

> Otherwise, you may end up with a topic that has enough replicas. It may degrade the performance of the CDC producer substantially.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Otherwise, you may end up with a topic that does not have enough replicas which may degrade the performance of the CDC producer substantially.
```
